# Dalai-Lama-dilemma-what-the-succession-battle-will-mean-for-Tibet
Dalai Lama dilemma: what the succession battle will mean for Tibet
Our weekly podcast on China. This week, what will happen when the spiritual leader of Tibet dies?
This summer, the Dalai Lama chose his 90th birthday celebrations to confirm he would reincarnate when he dies. But China says it alone has the right to name the next spiritual leader of Tibet. How could the fight for the next Dalai Lama shape the lives of Tibetans and the future of the Tibetan movement?

Hosts: Jeremy Page, The Economist’s chief China correspondent, and Sarah Wu, our China correspondent.

Listen to what matters most, from global politics and business to science and technology—subscribe to Economist Podcasts+.

For more information about how to access Economist Podcasts+, please visit our FAQs page or watch our video explaining how to link your account.

Transcript
Converted by AI

Hide
This podcast transcript is generated by third-party AI. It has not been reviewed prior to publication. We make no representations or warranties in relation to the transcript, its accuracy or its completeness, and we disclaim all liability regarding its receipt, content and use. If you have any concerns about the transcript, please email us at podcasts@economist.com.

Read more about how we are using AI.

Jeremy Page [00:00:03]  In Dharamsala, a small town in the Himalayan foothills of northern India, the Dalai Lama is holding an audience with a group of devotees. Despite his age, he’s still remarkably active. He holds these audiences a couple of times a week, and he still exudes extraordinary charisma. As he enters the room, he has a big smile on his face. And as he meets the devotees, he looks them in the eye one by one as he dispenses blessings and advice, and he often jokes with them too. His trademark deep-throated chuckle fills the room.

Sarah Wu [00:00:50] Since fleeing Tibet in 1959 to escape Chinese communist rule, the Dalai Lama has become famous around the world, not only as a spiritual leader, but also as an international symbol of resilience. He’s traveled the world but princes and presidents, preached to crowds of thousands, and even received the Nobel Peace Prize for his nonviolent campaign for greater freedom in Tibet.

Jeremy Page [00:01:16] But at 90 years old, the Dalai Lama is now slowing down. Ill health has confined him largely to northern India in recent years. And so the thoughts of his followers are now turning to what happens after his death.

Jeremy Page [00:01:40] This summer, the 14th Dalai Lama confirmed that he would be reincarnated in the free world, in other words, outside China’s borders.

Sarah Wu [00:01:48] But the Chinese government said only it had the right to choose his successor and reaffirmed its control of the region with Xi Jinping’s surprise visit to Tibet last month. I am Sarah Wu, The Economist’s China Correspondent based in Beijing.

Jeremy Page [00:02:03] And I’m Jeremy Page, the Economist’s Chief China Correspondent, currently in Delhi with all the street sounds that come with being here. And today we’re looking at the imminent struggle over the appointment of the next Dalai Lama and asking what that means for the future of Tibet. This is Drum Tower.

Sarah Wu [00:02:20] From The Economist.

Jeremy Page [00:02:28] So hi, Sarah. Great to see you. I hope that you’ve caught up on some sleep since that incredibly early start ahead of the big military parade in Beijing.

Sarah Wu [00:02:38] Thank you. I think I’m getting a bit too old for waking up at 1 30 a.m.

Jeremy Page [00:02:43] I know that feeling. Well, I’m glad you’re feeling refreshed because we’ve got lots to talk about today and it’s really exciting because we are doing our first episode together. This is also, hopefully, the first of many that you and I will do because we’re taking over as the new co-hosts of Drum Tower. I will be doing it from Taipei and you, of course, will be from Beijing, where I used to be based for the best part of 15 years in total.

Sarah Wu [00:03:11] I remember before moving to Beijing, I really enjoyed listening to David and Alice. I felt transported to different corners of China. And I think that’s one of the best part of our jobs, getting to talk to people from all walks of life. And that’s what you’ve done this week. You went to northern India, to Dharamsala. What’s it like over there?

Jeremy Page [00:03:31] Yeah, that’s right. I was there for a week. It’s a beautiful place. You know, it’s in the foothills of the Himalayas. It’s nestled up against the first big snow-capped peaks. And it’s fascinating because it’s sort of this weird combination of Tibetan monasteries and cultural centers and schools. And so you see a lot of Tibetans wandering around, some in traditional dress. But there are also lots of Indian tea shops and hotels because in recent years it’s become quite a popular holiday destination, particularly for Punjabis. And they go up there to escape the summer heat especially. It’s a little bit of a party town for younger Punjabis these days.

Sarah Wu [00:04:07] That’s an incredible image. Party town and Dalai Lama’s HQ.

Jeremy Page [00:04:11] Right. It’s fascinating. Also, you get lots of foreigners that go up there as well. Some of them are there to study Buddhism and some of them sort of hippies, so you see people wandering around in like tie-dye, barefoot, I mean, looking much the same as they did when I first visited like back in the early 90s.

Sarah Wu [00:04:27] When you may have been one of those hippies. I can imagine it now.

Jeremy Page [00:04:31] I couldn’t possibly comment on that.

Sarah Wu [00:04:34] You were there because foreign journalists can’t easily get into Tibet, only very occasionally through government-arranged tours.

Jeremy Page [00:04:42] That’s right. The rules in China are, as you know, that you can only visit Tibet as part of a foreign ministry arranged trip. And those things happen very, very rarely. I only managed to go on one during 15 years as a reporter in China. It was very tightly controlled, the schedule. We only saw what the government really wanted us to see. And so we went to carefully selected monasteries and other sites and had very scripted interviews with monks and others who very much just repeated the official line.

Sarah Wu [00:05:12] I’m not surprised your trip was so tightly controlled because it’s the same for Tibetans too. You do sometimes meet Tibetans in other parts of China, but it’s very hard for them to leave the country. They can apply for visas to go to universities abroad, but not everyone has that option. And that’s why some people decide to hike over the mountains to Nepal to get out

Jeremy Page [00:05:33] Exactly, and that’s roughly the same route that the Dalai Lama took 70-odd years ago when he fled Tibet. And after India gave him sanctuary, he set up a government in exile in Dharamsala, as well as schools, monasteries, and cultural centers, and it sort of became like a mini Tibet in India. And over the next five or six decades, thousands more Tibetans also fled their homeland and ended up here. In India, but the number of escaping has really dwindled recently as China has stepped up security on the border. So as well as going to this group audience with the Dalai Lama for this episode, I spoke to a handful of exiles who did manage to escape in the last year or so, and interestingly they all came on a similar route, paying about 20 to 30 thousand yuan to guides or middlemen to get across that border to Nepal. And one of them who had a particularly memorable story was called Namkhi. She was a nomad from the northeastern Tibet who escaped by walking for 10 days. across the Tibetan plaza and then over the Himalayas into Nepal in 2023. And she described this incredibly arduous and dangerous journey.

Sarah Wu [00:07:46] That’s a really powerful recollection. It’s clear from how she describes meeting the Dalai Lama, how important he is to her. And that’s a feeling that’s widespread among Tibetans, right?

Jeremy Page [00:08:00] It is, yeah, because the Dalai Lamas, they’re traditionally both spiritual and political leaders of Tibet. They were sort of like god-kings. So this Dalai Lama, like his predecessors, is regarded by Tibetan Buddhists as a living Buddha. So even though he’s technically given up his political powers now, he still inspires deep religious devotion in most Tibetans and has significant political authority among many of them as well.

Sarah Wu [00:08:29] And that’s partly what’s so interesting about the succession crisis, the way the Dalai Lama is appointed is quite esoteric.

Jeremy Page [00:08:36] Right, it is. I mean, in Tibetan tradition, after a Dalai Lama dies, his senior aides and top lamas form a search party to identify a young child as the Dalai Lama’s reincarnation. So the current one was identified age just two. But Dalai Lamas can also do something called emanation, which means manifesting as an existing person while they are still alive. And so there was some talk of that a few years back. Because the advantage would be that the current Dalai Lama could choose exactly who his successor would be. And that might help to sort of prevent Chinese interference and could also allow the current dalai lama to train up his successor directly, sort of impart all his experience and learning over the years.

Sarah Wu [00:09:20] And that would also cut the wait time, no? You wouldn’t have to wait for a child to grow up.

Jeremy Page [00:09:25] Exactly, you wouldn’t have this sort of interregnum which can last sort of 10 or 15 years while the child’s growing up and getting an education.

Sarah Wu [00:09:32] But I guess the problem is that the Atheist Communist Party has long said that they have the sole authority to decide how lamas’ souls transmigrate.

Jeremy Page [00:09:40] Yeah, I mean, I remember hearing Chinese officials talking about this years and years ago. They’ve been preparing for a very long time and the Dalai Lama too has been talking about it for some while, but the issue really sort of came to a head this summer, just a few days before the Dalay Lama’s 90th birthday, when he issued his most authoritative statement yet confirming that he would reincarnate in the traditional way and that his successor would be found. Outside of Tibet and therefore Chinese control.

Sarah Wu [00:10:12] And China responded pretty quickly. It reiterated that China was the sole authority when it comes to deciding who the next Dalai Lama would be. And then not long after, Xi Jinping made a surprise visit to Lhasa, the Tibetan capital. It was only his second visit to the region as China’s leader, and it was all over the news here. In fact, I was having breakfast at a hotel and Xi came out on the morning news as I was eating my congee. He was in a bus waving to all of these locals, lining the streets. With big smiles on their faces. But beneath the smiles, Xi’s message was clear. He talked about advancing the building of a community for the Chinese nation and the need for the state to guide Tibetan Buddhism in adapting itself to socialist society.

Jeremy Page [00:11:00] Yeah, I thought those remarks were particularly interesting. I also think it’s important at this point to outline China’s basic position on Tibet. It says that the region has been part of its territory for centuries. Communist Chinese forces then asserted that claim when they took control of the region in 1950. And really ever since, China’s been trying to integrate Tibet more closely with the rest of the country. Often through political campaigns, but also through economic development. They’ve been pouring in a lot of investment in infrastructure and public services, especially over the last couple of decades.

Sarah Wu [00:11:35] Yeah, exactly. In China, the message really is about liberating this region from poverty. Historically, Tibet was this theocratic, basically feudal place. Dalai Lama’s ruled like kings, and many ordinary Tibetans worked as serfs, so without pay. And it is still one of the poorest regions in China, but the government says it’s promoting the region’s economic development and that its policies help young Tibetans prepare for life in modern China.

Jeremy Page [00:12:01] Yeah, but on the other hand, many Tibetans still view China as an occupier. They accuse Chinese authorities of destroying thousands of temples and monasteries, particularly during the Cultural Revolution, also suppressing Tibetan language and religion. And they now see a sort of concerted effort to wipe out Tibetan identity and fully assimilate Tibet into China. And to a lot of them. China’s claim that they have the right to pick the next Dalai Lama is just part of that broader effort.

Sarah Wu [00:12:33] So, we’re now facing the prospect of two Dalai Lamas. One identified outside of China by followers of the current Dalai Lama, and one appointed by the Communist Party inside China who can help them spread their socialist version of Tibetan Buddhism and Xi Jinping’s concept of a single Chinese national identity.

Jeremy Page [00:12:53] Right, and it’s not the first time that China’s taken this approach. Back in 1995, the Dalai Lama appointed a six-year-old boy to be the next Panchen Lama. That’s, roughly speaking, the second most senior figure in Tibetan Buddhism. And soon after that, the boy just disappeared. Chinese authorities whisked him away with his family. He was never seen in public again, though China claims that he’s leading a normal life somewhere in the country. And China then appointed a panchalama of its own.

Sarah Wu [00:13:24] How did that work out?

Jeremy Page [00:13:26] Well, it’s interesting because it hasn’t been entirely successful. You know, in some ways they managed to sort of stop people from worshiping the Dalai Lama’s choice for the Panchen Lama. But as I found on my own visits to Tibet and as Namkyi and other exiles told me, most Tibetans still revere the 10th Panchen Lama, who died suddenly in 1989, but do not recognize the Chinese appointed one.

Jeremy Page [00:14:17] And Namkyi, like the other three, also told me she was convinced that China would try to do the same with the Dalai Lama, but that as with the Panchen Lama its choice would not be accepted by Tibetans.

Sarah Wu [00:14:27] Hmm, it makes it sound like the task at hand for the party to change the hearts and minds is a really hard task. And it’s really interesting that she says people around her had photographs of the Dalai Lama. China accuses him of being a dangerous separatist. They call him a wolf in monk’s clothing, and they’ve carried out regular crackdowns on people keeping photographs of him.

Jeremy Page [00:14:52] Yeah, that’s right. And, you know, I remember the first couple of times I went to Tibet as a tourist, you know, people would regularly come up to you and sort of show you that like a small photo the Dalai Lama they had hidden in their robes and kids would come up on the street asking for pictures of the Dalay Lama. But what I found really interesting about my interviews is that everybody I spoke to said that they had Dalai Lama pictures in their homes. Some of them, they said, you know kept them in secret. They said they had to be careful when they had Chinese officials came to their homes for things like censuses and sometimes they would take them out and bury them in the mountains to keep them safe.

Sarah Wu [00:15:27] Hmm

Jeremy Page [00:15:28] But I think that just shows that despite all of the Chinese efforts to educate people, to control media, to punish people for holding Dalai Lama photos, people seem to be still prepared to take considerable risks to have this image of him inside their homes.

Sarah Wu [00:15:44] It’s fascinating to me that kids would come up to you and know to ask for a photo of the Dalai Lama.

Jeremy Page [00:15:50] Yeah, I guess that’s because, you know, certainly at that time, people would talk about the Dalai Lama in their homes quite a lot. And so children would have sort of become aware that he was a figure who was revered and that a photograph of him was something to be valued. You know, I don’t know if children these days still ask for Dalai lama photos in Tibet. But certainly the people I interviewed all said that they themselves as children had learned about the Dalai lama from their own families while they were growing up. And that was certainly the case for Namki herself. And when she was just 15 years old, she was actually arrested after she and her cousin staged a protest by carrying a large photograph of the Dalai Lama down a street near her home. And she spent three years in jail as a result.

Sarah Wu [00:16:34] I think that that kind of punishment makes me think of how important this portrait of the Dalai Lama is to the government, like what it represents and why they don’t want it shown. Even at 15, she must have known the possible consequences of protesting. What made her do it?

Jeremy Page [00:16:54] So she told me it was a combination of factors, but it was predominantly the restrictions that were imposed on her region after a wave of protests against Chinese rule in Tibet in 2008, just a few months before the Beijing Olympics. Those protests were centered on Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, but they also took place in other areas, including around Kirti Monastery, which is near Namki’s home. And after that, there was a big security crackdown. And then there was also a wave of self-immolation protests, people setting fire to themselves in protest against Chinese rule, which started in that area around that monastery. And actually one of her cousins self-imilated in 2011. He actually survived, but the family believe he was tortured in detention and eventually died in prison. But it was interesting, several of the exiles I spoke to talked about how Chinese policies in Tibet had grown more severe under Xi Jinping and how media controls become a lot more strict. But in spite of that, three of the four who I interviewed had seen or heard of self-immolations. So it just goes to show that in spite all those Chinese controls, word does spread often by word of mouth.

Sarah Wu [00:18:11] But those words don’t really spread to the rest of China. In 2008, there was coverage of the protests against Chinese rule, which were blamed on the Dalai Lama and foreign backers. Immediately after, many Chinese people saw Tibet as a dangerous place. But since then, you don’t hear about self-immolations here. Instead, you overwhelmingly hear about development. The state has doubled down on security in Tibet and really promoted domestic tourism. Today, when most people think about Tibet, they think of the striking nature, the train tickets there that are really hard to snag, and Tibetan Buddhism.

Jeremy Page [00:18:51] Yeah, that’s right. And it reminds me, one of the exiles I spoke to had actually been a tour guide back in Tibet. He used to show Chinese tourists around places like the Potala Palace, the traditional seat of the Dalai Lamas in Lhasa, and the Jokhang temple, which is in the center of the city. And he said that made him realize how little Han Chinese people especially knew about the real history of Tibet and about the Dalay Lama.

Sarah Wu [00:19:18] Well, the history that’s being taught in Tibet is also changing, too. China has now launched a big effort to teach young Tibetans in Mandarin and to school them in officially approved history. Hundreds of thousands of children, some as young as four, are thought to have been taken from their families and put into these schools in the last decade or so. Did Nam Ki mention them at all?

Jeremy Page [00:19:41] Yes, she told me that a lot of Tibetan families were now forced to send their children to what she described as colonial style boarding schools. And she said they could only come back to see their families for a couple of weeks each year.

Sarah Wu [00:20:45] From what Namkyi is saying, it sounds like these schools are really changing the next generation of Tibetans. But you said earlier that she still believes a Chinese-appointed Dalai Lama would be rejected in Tibet.

Jeremy Page [00:20:58] Yeah, that’s a good point. Xi and the others I spoke to, they all felt that China was having some success with the very young through these schools and other sort of controls on education and media. But they also agreed that the older generations would not be convinced. And when I say older generations, I’m talking about people now in their 20s, so actually still quite young. People like Nemki and actually everyone I was speaking to was of a similar age because they grew up. Learning about the Dalai Lama from their families or from social media, you know, in that period in the late noughties and early 2010s when I was in Beijing and China hadn’t yet sort of sorted out its censorship of social media. So information was spreading to a far greater degree than it does today. So they were really worried about losing this unifying figure in the Dalay Lama after his death. But I also think it could be a real challenge for China to... Gain legitimacy for their choice of the next Dalai Lama. And a couple of my interviewees, including Nam Ki, warned that any Chinese efforts to impose its choice for the Dalai lama could provoke another uprising across Tibet.

Jeremy Page [00:22:35] So one of the really interesting questions here is, how would the international community respond if there were these kinds of protests across Tibet? In previous cases, there was quite a lot of international sympathy, there was public statements of concern, there was a certain amount of pressure on the Chinese government. But as China’s power continues to grow in the world, will other countries really be willing to do that again?

Sarah Wu [00:23:10] It’s clearly a precarious time for Tibetans. It’s hard to know how world leaders will react if there’s violence as a result of this succession crisis. But we can look at how other countries are responding at the moment.

Jeremy Page [00:23:23] That’s right. And there are two key countries here, and they are India and America.

Sarah Wu [00:23:29] Let’s start with India. Clearly, support for Tibet is critical because they currently host the Dalai Lama in Dharam Sala.

Jeremy Page [00:23:37] Exactly. India has offered him sanctuary since 1959, partly because it sees Tibet as an important buffer zone along its disputed border with China, and partly because he is actually revered by Indian Buddhists and many Hindus. But the Indian government has always trod quite carefully in its public statements on Tibet, and you saw that in a slightly confused response to the most recent announcements from the Dalai Lama, one Indian minister endorsed the Dalay Lama statement saying no one had a right to interfere in the reincarnation process, but then India’s foreign ministry issued a statement saying it took no position on the issue. So that hints at a slightly sort of conflicted view within the Indian government.

Sarah Wu [00:24:24] Hey, I don’t envy their position of having to walk that line. I know you’ve covered both India and China for decades and did an episode on Drum Tower not so long ago about how relations between the two countries are improving a bit. India imports a huge amount of industrial inputs from China, especially for sectors such as smartphones and pharmaceuticals. And Modi just set foot in China for the first time in seven years. This month to attend the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit. Is India worried that the Dalai Lama’s death could put them in a difficult position?

Jeremy Page [00:25:02] That’s a very good question because some of the Dalai Lama’s followers think he will probably be reincarnated in India. And if he does, it’s likely that the Indian government will give sanctuary to the new Dalai lama. But at the same time India’s really keen not to provoke China unnecessarily. I think it’ll try to portray that as a continuation of its policy because trade has been expanding between the two countries very rapidly and actually hit a record high last year, despite a bloody border clash in 2020. And now the two country are in the midst of a kind of rapprochement after that border standoff was resolved in October last year. And that may even be accelerating now as relations between India and America have taken a turn for the worse because of their differences of trade and a recent conflict between India and Pakistan.

Sarah Wu [00:26:00] So it sounds like India is walking a tightrope. What about America?

Jeremy Page [00:26:04] Yeah, American support for Tibet goes back a long way, you know, from 1957 to 69, the CIA actually provided the Tibetan resistance with active support, arming and training a guerrilla force based in a neighboring Nepal. But that wound down when America started to think about a detente with China as a way to assist its efforts to weaken the Soviet Union in the Cold War.

Sarah Wu [00:26:33] But there is still a lot of support for Tibetans in America, right? There were the free Tibet bumper stickers, celebrities advocating for Tibet, and various American presidents since then have met the Dalai Lama. But given Trump’s way of doing foreign policy, do you think support for a future Dalai lama could become a bargaining chip?

Jeremy Page [00:26:54] So Donald Trump hasn’t said a whole lot on the subject. He doesn’t seem that interested in Tibet or in human rights issues more broadly. But in his first term, he did sign into law something called the Tibet Policy and Support Act, which states that only Tibetans can choose the next Dalai Lama and that Chinese officials who interfere in that process will be subject to sanctions.

Sarah Wu [00:27:17] That seems quite supportive. What about in his second term?

Jeremy Page [00:27:20] It’s a bit of a mixed picture. There are some worrying signs for Tibetans, especially the cuts to the USAID, which withdrew around $22 million in annual funding for Tibetians. That’s equivalent to more than half of the government-in-exiles budget. And actually, the room where I interviewed some of the exiles, it was filled with USAID stickers. It was just one sort of illustration of how important that funding was for the government exile. Some of that money has been reinstated now, and the US State Department official actually attended the Dalai Lama’s birthday celebrations in July, but there’s so much going on in the US-China relationship, and it is true that there’s a lot of stuff in the mix that could be part of a trade deal or a broader settlement between China and the U.S., maybe including Taiwan as well. So far, no one’s really suggested that support for Tibet would be part of that. But I’m sure the Chinese government will keep pushing the US and other foreign governments to stop providing any support, you know, rhetorically or otherwise for the Dalai Lama, for the community in exile. And I think the fact that, you know, there’s so much uncertainty now about the US government position on this, that really makes the response from other democracies all the more important, particularly the European Union. And in June, the EU took quite a significant step in issuing a statement saying that the next Dalai Lama should be chosen without government interference. So Tibetans in the community in exile were very encouraged by that. But even if the EU and some other democracies continue to offer such support, I think there’s a limit to how much pressure other governments are really going to put on the Chinese government. And none of them are likely to risk having any official contact with the next Dalay summer.

Sarah Wu [00:29:10] Hmm, which gets us to the big question. Where does all of this leave the Tibetan movement and Tibet?

Jeremy Page [00:29:17] Right, so one of the big issues for the Tibetan diaspora is do they continue to push for greater autonomy within China, which is the middle path which the Dalai Lama has advocated for many years, or do they take a sort of more radical approach and push for complete independence from China, even though that’s not realistic in the near or even the medium term. So to find out more about that issue when I was in Dharamsala earlier in the summer, I met with Dolmar Tsuring. She is the deputy speaker of the parliament in exile.

Jeremy Page [00:30:00] It was a reminder that for a lot of Tibetans, this reincarnation issue, it’s not just a political question, it’s a deeply emotional one.

Jeremy Page [00:30:39] So just to explain what she means by democratization of the government in exile, the Dalai Lama gave up his political powers in 2011 and transferred them to an elected prime minister. And one reason for doing that was to undermine Chinese propaganda, which portrays the Dalay Lama’s presiding over theocracy, as you were saying earlier. And another reason was to prepare for the Dalaj Lama eventual death so that there There would be some- political continuity in the leadership of diaspora, at least.

Sarah Wu [00:31:12] I’m struck by how even as it’s really painful for her to speak about the Dalai Lama’s death and this future after him, it sounds like she’s also holding onto some hope that there will be, as she says, an amicable solution.

Jeremy Page [00:31:29] Yes, that’s right. She is certainly one of the supporters of that approach, because she thinks it’s more realistic. She thinks that if Tibetans would take a more radical approach, calling for independence, there would be huge backlash from the Chinese government.

Sarah Wu [00:32:15] We have to be pragmatic. You had said earlier that not everyone in the Tibetan community agrees with this approach.

Jeremy Page [00:32:21] I think that the majority still want to follow the Dalai Lama’s approach, but there is this vocal minority who think otherwise. They argue that it hasn’t really achieved much in terms of winning greater autonomy for Tibet. In fact, China’s grip has only grown stronger, and it no longer helps to win that much international support because... No world leader has met the Dalai Lama since Obama did in 2016, and China imposes increasing costs on any foreign governments that do express support for the Tibetan cause. So to get an understanding of that point of view, I also met with Namgyal Dolka. She is a younger member of the Tibetan parliament in exile and comes from the more sort of radical side. Both her parents, as well as some other members of her family, actually. Held as political prisoners inside Tibet.

Sarah Wu [00:33:30] To carry the baggage of the hurt sounds at once deeply personal and part of this broader mission.

Jeremy Page [00:33:39] Yeah, I think that’s right because, you know, so many of people in the diaspora certainly have these stories about their parents, their grandparents, who were either sort of detained or suffered in some way under Chinese rule in Tibet. So it’s a very sort of personal and emotional issue for a lot of Tibetans living in exile. And it is an incredibly difficult question, you that they have this tremendous devotion for Dalai Lama, and yet I think there is this sense of frustration amongst especially the younger generations. They’ve seen what’s happened in Hong Kong and what might happen to Taiwan. So you can understand why they might be interested in exploring a different approach.

Jeremy Page [00:34:56] Another really interesting point that Namjel made was, she brought up Ukraine, and she said that she and some colleagues were looking very closely at that and how President Zelensky had managed to win a lot of international support through his willingness to fight against Russian forces. And she said, you know, immediately after Chinese communist troops went into Tibet, there was a similar resistance movement in Tibet, a similar sort of sentiment, which of course at one point was beaten back by the United States through the CIA. But that that sort of passion had kind of gone out of the Tibetan movement now So I then asked her does that mean that she would actually support violent resistance if some foreign support was on offer

Sarah Wu [00:35:58] It’s striking to hear an elected figure say that, that it also makes me wonder how representative her view is within Tibet. Did you put that question to recent arrivals in Dharamsala?

Jeremy Page [00:36:10] Yes, I did, and it was very interesting. Their views were pretty much evenly divided. You know, one person spoke very passionately about how, in his view, Tibet had always been independent, and therefore the only thing to do was to push for complete independence. He thought it was unrealistic that China would ever grant Tibet a greater degree of autonomy, sort of based on what he’d experienced. And then Namkyi, for example, was equally passionate in saying that Tibetans should continue to follow the Dalai Lama’s approach the middle way, because she thought that that was the best approach. And she said, you know, the priority is to protect Tibetan religion and Tibetan culture and Tibetan traditions, you now, rather than to have complete independence. And she also had a very clear idea of what her own role in that should be.

Sarah Wu [00:37:28] Okay, so Jeremy, from your trips to Dharamsala in the last few weeks, where do you think the Tibetan movement is heading now?

Jeremy Page [00:37:35] I think we’re going into a period of great uncertainty for the Tibetan diaspora, particularly because There’s going to be a period after the Dalai Lama dies and they’ve selected his reincarnation when that child is being educated and trained, and that could last at least 15 years. And during that period, there is going to a bit of a leadership vacuum. And during this time, you’re also going to have the Chinese government making huge efforts to promote its choice for the Dalay Lama. And then you’ve also got the risk that once that child has grown up and takes on role fully. What are they going to be like as a person? Are they going to be able to play a similar role to that of the 14th Dalai Lama? Over Tibetan history there have been good Dalai Lamas and there have been bad ones. So I think there’s tremendous uncertainty on that front. But I think, there’s also uncertainty for China as well because the thing about the 14th Dalai Lama is that he is this tremendously unifying figure, both for Tibetans in the diaspora and for Tibetans inside Tibet. And I think China understands that deep down and over the years they have, on occasions, tried to get him back because, you know, their ultimate goal is to have a Dalai Lama inside Tibet who has the loyalty of its people, but also loyal to the Communist Party, doesn’t look like those efforts are going to come to fruition within his lifetime. But once he’s gone, they lose the one person who could have played that role. And from what we’ve been hearing, it’s unlikely that a figure they try to install as their own choice is going to be able to inspire sufficient loyalty amongst Tibetans. But tell me, Sarah, what do you think this all means for China?

Sarah Wu [00:39:14] I think it cuts both ways for China. On one hand, it’s an opportunity for China to consolidate control. If it can convince enough people to recognize its choice of the Dalai Lama, then it can undermine the Tibetan government in exile and resistance to its policies within Tibet. But this all also comes with risks. If China’s efforts provoke big protests and a crackdown, that could damage China’s image abroad, encourage more support for the government in exile, and set back China’s efforts to win over the hearts and minds of Tibetans. And this is a really strategically important region for China. Tibet is on the border with India, where there have been clashes in recent years and where it’s building this mega dam.

Jeremy Page [00:39:59] Yes, right, that’s a whole other episode of Drum Tower, but it’s definitely true that dam is a reason why China wants to ensure control over its southern border and its western borders in particular.

Sarah Wu [00:40:10] Exactly, and Tibet is also politically important for Xi Jinping and his vision of a single, unified nation. The battle of the two Dalai Lamas for China is part of this larger drive for cultural homogeneity within its borders. Beijing’s ability to control Tibet is crucial to the party’s one China push. If this effort fails, that strikes at the heart of one of Xi’s most important policies. Before we go, I wanted to give a special thanks to Ben, who listens to us from Alaska, where he lives and works on a glacier, handling sled dogs. Our predecessor, David, is obsessed with cats. And Jeremy, I’ve heard you have dogs. Are they anything like Ben’s?

Jeremy Page [00:40:55] I suspect not. Mine are two Delhi street dogs. I’m not sure how they would be trying to pull a sled, but I’m pretty certain that they would not be up for the cold.

Sarah Wu [00:41:05] Well, then they’re in luck going to a very hot Taiwan.

Jeremy Page [00:41:08] Yeah, they should have a nice time there.

Sarah Wu [00:41:10] I mean during this recording I can hear all the honking out your window and it makes me think of how much I miss the mountains of Taipei. They’re so quiet and I’m really excited for you and your dogs to have a more peaceful soundtrack in the coming years.

Jeremy Page [00:41:25] Yeah, exactly. Thanks for getting in touch, Ben. We love reading all your emails. Please keep them coming to drum at economist dot com.

Sarah Wu [00:41:34] And thank you for listening to Drum Tower. Lucy Rohr and Jiehao Chen produced this episode. The editor is Rosie Gillott. The executive producer is Hannah Mourinho. Sound design is by Amelia Tsai. Drum Tower’s music was composed by Jocelyn Tan.


